[Docs] RSS and DPS Usage (#1193)
AleoHQ/aleo: docs/guide/12_delegated_proving_and_scanning.md

# Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Credentials and authentication](#credentials-and-authentication)
- [Record Scanning Service (RSS)](#record-scanning-service-rss)
- [Delegated Proving Service (DPS)](#delegated-proving-service-dps)
- [Quick reference](#quick-reference)
- [Best practices](#best-practices)

---

# Overview

## Delegated Proving Service (DPS)

The Aleo blockchain allows users to execute programs on-chain while preserving the privacy of the inputs and outputs to 
those functions. This enables applications like private value transfers, private identity verification, private swaps 
and more.

Building these proofs in a completely privately is traditionally done on a local device, however this proess often takes
a significant amount of time.

Delegated proving allows users to delegate generation of proofs to an external service which can produce proofs quickly
and privately within a Trusted Execution Environment that ensures no one but the caller knows the content of the proof.

Generally this works in the following way:
1. **Build** a *proving request* (program, function, inputs, fee settings, broadcast flag).

> 2. **Submit** it to the delegated prover in **encrypted** form, which only decrypted within a TEE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Submit** it to the delegated prover in **encrypted** form, which can only be decrypted within a TEE.
```

3. The proving service submits the **transaction** to the blockchain.

This guide helps users instrument delegated Proving and Record Scanning to power their privacy preserving applications.

## Record Scanning Service (RSS)

The Aleo network uses UTXO style struct data structures called `Records` to share encrypted information between parties.

> Records can represent abritrary information (depending on the context of the program its defined in) such as transfers 
> of encrypted funds from one user to another or encrypted identity verification. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Records can encode arbitrary program-defined data, such as encrypted fund transfers or encrypted identity verification.
```

As an example. Aleo uses the `credits`record in the credits.aleo program to represent private transfers of value between
on use and another.

```
record credits:
   owner as address.private;
   microcredits as u64.private;

> ```

Reviewer: Do we want to use Leo formatting or Aleo bytecode formatting?

When a record is generated by a function, it appears on the Aleo blockchain in encrypted form and is only decryptable by
the owner of the record. Further, like UTXOS, a record can only be used once as in an input and thereafter it is 

> considered used/spent by the Aleo chain. Any inputs also appear on-chain as encrypted data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
considered used/spent by the Aleo chain. Any inputs also appear on-chain as encrypted ciphertexts.
```
Explicitly using "ciphertexts" might help clarify that not all private data fields are records.

Because all records are encrypted, a user must find their records by scanning the inputs and outputs on the entire chain
attempting to decrypt these inputs/outputs with their private ViewKey. 

> The record scanner provides a service indexes that Aleo ledger and indexes records which belong to specific Aleo accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The record scanner services indexes the Aleo ledger and identifies records belonging to specific Aleo accounts.
```

> Users provided their ViewKey in encrypted form to a record scanner within an enclave and that key is used to find all
> records for a user. Neither the scanner service nor any other outside party except for the ViewKey holder is able 
> perceive the ViewKey due to the trusted execution environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users provide their ViewKey in encrypted form to a record scanner within an enclave and that key is used to find all
records for a user. Neither the scanner service nor any other outside party except for the ViewKey holder is able 
perceive the ViewKey due to the privacy guarantees afforded by the trusted execution environment.
```

> Upon registration of an Aleo account, the record scanner identifies all records associated with that account and 
> provides the owner of that account with all records they currently own allowing them to keep track of things like
> private balances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon registration of an Aleo account, the record scanner identifies all records associated with that account and 
provides the account owner with all of their unencrypted records, allowing them to track private 
private balances.
```

---
# Usage Guide

> This guide shows how to access the record scanning and delegated proving with JS/TS either using the Provable SDK or
> custom TS/JS code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide shows how to access record scanning and delegated proving with JS/TS either using the Provable SDK or
custom JS/TS code.
```

## Credentials and authentication
The Delegated Proving Service (DPS) and the record scanning service (RSS) are both hosted behind the provable API at 
https://api.provable.com/v2.

> To authenticate to these service you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To authenticate to these service you need:
```

The **Record scanner** endpoints may accept the API key in a header (e.g. `X-Provable-API-Key`) or an issued JWT.

The **Delegated prover** endpoints typically require a JWT in the `Authorization` header; the SDK handles JWT refresh 
when both `apiKey` and `consumerId` are configured.

### Base URLs

The SDK appends the network (`mainnet` or `testnet`) to the host you provide. For example, if the host is 
`https://api.provable.com/v2`, the effective base url  is:
* Prover: 
  * Mainnet: `https://api.provable.com/v2/prove/mainnet`
  * Testnet: `https://api.provable.com/v2/prove/tesnet`
* Scanner:
  * Mainnet: `https://api.provable.com/v2/scanner/mainnet`
  * Testnet: `https://api.provable.com/v2/scanner/testnet`

## Record Scanning Service (RSS)

When using the record scanning service, users must first register their encrypted view key to the record scanner TEE via
the following flow.

### Flow (encrypted registration)

> 0. Client must obtain an API key or JWT from the provable API.
> 1. Client requests an ephemeral X25519 public key from the scanner: `GET {scannerBase}/pubkey`.
> 2. Client encrypts the view key and start block (e.g. with [encryptRegistrationRequest](https://github.com/ProvableHQ/sdk/blob/mainnet/sdk/src/security.ts#L51)) and sends: `POST {scannerBase}/register/encrypted` with `{ key_id, ciphertext }`.
> 3. Scanner decrypts in a secure environment, indexes records for that view key, and returns a `uuid` (and optional `job_id`, `status`). The client uses `uuid` for subsequent queries (e.g. owned records).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Client must obtain an API key or JWT from the provable API.
2. Client requests an ephemeral X25519 public key from the scanner: `GET {scannerBase}/pubkey`.
3. Client encrypts the view key and start block (e.g. with [encryptRegistrationRequest](https://github.com/ProvableHQ/sdk/blob/mainnet/sdk/src/security.ts#L51)) and sends: `POST {scannerBase}/register/encrypted` with `{ key_id, ciphertext }`.
4. Scanner decrypts in a secure environment, indexes records for that view key, and returns a `uuid` (and optional `job_id`, `status`). The client uses `uuid` for subsequent queries (e.g. owned records).
```

    throw new Error("UUID not valid; re-register with registerViewKeyEncrypted and retry.");
  }
  if (!res.ok) throw new Error(`Owned records failed: ${await res.text()}`);

  const data = await res.json();
  return Array.isArray(data) ? data : data?.data ?? [];
}

// Usage
const account = new Account({ privateKey: "APrivateKey1zkp..." });
const result = await registerViewKeyEncrypted(
  "https://api.provable.com/v2/mainnet",
  account.viewKey(),
  0,
  process.env.RECORD_SCANNER_API_KEY
);
const records = await getOwnedRecords(
  "https://api.provable.com/v2/mainnet",
  result.uuid,
  process.env.RECORD_SCANNER_API_KEY
);
```

You can define `OwnedRecord` to match the scanner response shape, or import it from the SDK if available.

### Reference Implementation

[A full implementation of the Record Scanner can be viewed here](https://github.com/ProvableHQ/sdk/blob/mainnet/sdk/src/record-scanner.ts) for usage in one's own SDK.

---

## Delegated Proving Service (DPS)

When using the delegated proving service, users must obtain a Provable API key. They are then able to submit Proving
requests in encrypted form to the delegated proving service.

### Flow (encrypted proving)

> 0. Client must obtain an API key or JWT from the provable API.
> 1. Client requests an ephemeral X25519 public key from the prover: `GET {proverBase}/pubkey`.
> 2. Client builds a *proving request* (authorization, optional fee authorization, broadcast flag), encrypts it via a libsodium cryptobox (e.g. with [encryptProvingRequest](https://github.com/ProvableHQ/sdk/blob/mainnet/sdk/src/security.ts#L26)), and sends it to: `POST {proverBase}/prove/encrypted` with `{ "key_id": string, "ciphertext": string }`.
> 3. Prover decrypts in a secure environment, runs the proof, and returns a **transaction** and **broadcast_result** (if the request asked for broadcast). The client may submit the transaction themselves or use the broadcast result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Client must obtain an API key or JWT from the provable API.
2. Client requests an ephemeral X25519 public key from the prover: `GET {proverBase}/pubkey`.
3. Client builds a *proving request* (authorization, optional fee authorization, broadcast flag), encrypts it via a libsodium cryptobox (e.g. with [encryptProvingRequest](https://github.com/ProvableHQ/sdk/blob/mainnet/sdk/src/security.ts#L26)), and sends it to: `POST {proverBase}/prove/encrypted` with `{ "key_id": string, "ciphertext": string }`.
4. Prover decrypts in a secure environment, runs the proof, and returns a **transaction** and **broadcast_result** (if the request asked for broadcast). The client may submit the transaction themselves or use the broadcast result.
```

    Client->>SDK: encryptProvingRequest(publicKey, provingRequest)
    SDK-->>Client: ciphertext (base64)

    Client->>+Prover: POST /prove/encrypted { key_id, ciphertext }
    Note over Prover: Decrypt, prove, discard
    Prover-->>-Client: { "transaction": object, "broadcast_result": { "status", ... } }
```

### Routes (delegated prover)

All paths are relative to the prover base URL (e.g. `https://api.provable.com/v2/mainnet` when using the same host as the SDK).

| Path | Method | Purpose | Request body | Response |
|------|--------|----------|--------------|----------|
| `/pubkey` | GET | Ephemeral public key for encrypted proving | — | `{ "key_id": string, "public_key": string }` |
| `/prove/encrypted` | POST | Submit proving request (encrypted) | `{ "key_id": string, "ciphertext": string }` | Same as `/prove` on success |

Authentication (e.g. JWT in `Authorization`, cookies for session) is required for Provable’s API. In Node, you may need 
to forward the `set-cookie` header from the `/pubkey` response to the `/prove/encrypted` request so the prover can 
associate the two calls.

---

### Building a proving request

A **proving request** consists of:

> - An **authorization** for the program function (and inputs) the user wants to run.
> - An optional **fee authorization** (e.g. `credits.aleo` fee_public / fee_private) to pay for the execution—or **none** 
> - when using a fee master (`useFeeMaster: true`).
> - A **broadcast** flag indicating whether the prover should submit the resulting transaction to the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An **authorization** for the program function (and inputs) the user wants to run.
- An optional **fee authorization** (e.g. `credits.aleo` fee_public / fee_private) to pay for the execution—or **none** when using a fee master (`useFeeMaster: true`).
- A **broadcast** flag indicating whether the prover should submit the resulting transaction to the network.
```
